Once we segmented out words or tokenized
them we need to normalize them and
stem them.
So, normalizing means different things for
information retrieval, for example.
We require that the index text, and the
query terms have to have the same form so
we want to match U.S.A to USA.
If somebody asks a question of
a query with one of them and
the answer has the other,
we want them to match.
So it's like implicitly defining some
kind of of equivalent class of terms.
We might do this by always
deleting periods, for example.
We might take,
have a rule that takes U.f.a.tusa.
An alternative is some kind
of asymmetric expansion.
So for example, let's say that
we're doing information retrieval.
If I enter the term window,
I might want to search for window or
windows or any morphological
variant of the word window.
But if I enter capital W windows, I might
only want to search for Windows because
person is presently looking for the
product and not the part of your house.
And this is a potentially more powerful
algorithm, but less efficient and
much more complicated.
So in general, we use symmetric and
relatively simple expansions.
So for example in information retrieval,
we generally remove reduce all letters to
lower case, since users tend to use lower
case, and with some small exceptions.
So, for example, if we see upper
case in the middle of a sentence,
like General Motors,
we might want to keep the case.
And this matters for
distinguishing the verb fed from
the Federal Reserve Bank with
the capital F Or a group
like S-A-I-L that stands for Artificial
Intelligence Lab from the verb sail.
And it turn out that for sentiment
analysis or machine translation or
information extraction case
is in fact very helpful.
So, is a big difference between US and us.
We also often want to do lemmatizations,
so we're reducing our inflections or
our variant forms to their base form.
Words like am or are or
is will get lemmatized into be.
Car, cars, car apostrophe s, and
so on get lemmatized to car.
So a phrase like the boy's
cars are different colors
should get lemmatized to
the boy car be different color.
So in general, the task of lemmatization
is finding the correct dictionary
head word form for
a word form that you are given.
And of course, this is very important for
all sorts of applications particularly
machine translations where, for
example, if you have a Spanish verb like
quiero, I want or quieres, you want,
it's very important to know that this is
the same lemma as querer the verb to want.
So this general topic of looking at
parts of words leads us to morphology.
Morphology is the study of morpheme and
morpheme is the small unit
that makes up a word.
We usually distinguish two
kinds of morphemes stems
that's the core meaning-bearing
units in a word.
And Affixes, affixes the bits and
pieces that adhere to the stems
often with grammatical functions so
on this particular slide in fact
stem is the stem and s is the affix.
The word, affix,
just to confuse us, is a stem.
And there, es is the affix,
so there's an affix.
There's an s, and
there's an s, and meaningful,
there's another affix, and so on.
So stemming is the task of taking
off these affixes to reduce
terms to their stem.
And it's historically derived from
information retrieval although it's used
in all sorts of applications.
We use the word stemming when we
specifically mean a kind of a crude
chopping off of affixes and
this is, of course,
a language dependent kind of process.
So the English word automate,
automates, automatic,
automaton we like them all to
refer to the same stem, automat.
So stemming is like a simplified
version of limitization we pick up
a prefix of the word,
use that to represent the word and
we chop off all the suffixes that
are relatively leading to that stem.
So, here's an example of the text.
For example, compressed and
compression are both accept for
an equivalent to compress that's the text.
And if we stemmed that text
here's the resulting output.
So you can see that and
that we've lost the e on example and
compressed and compressing have
both turned into compress.
And here we used are, we could have use
be as our representation of are, but
for this particular example
we used are and so on.
The simplest algorithm,
the most commonly used one for
simple stemming of English
is the Porter algorithm.
And the Porter's algorithm is a series
of an iterated series of simple rules,
simple replace rules.
So, for example, one set of rules step one
a takes string like s's and
replaces with them with ss.
So in a word like caresses it
chops off the es of caresses.
Or rule that takes ies to i, chops off
the ies of ponies and leaves poni.
We're going to use pony with an i as a a
representation in Porter stemming of pony.
And the rules operate in order so that
at this point if there's any ss's left,
they stay as an s.
But any other ss get
deleted at this point.
So the s of cats is deleted,
while the ss of caress is kept.
Similarly, in step 1b,
we remove all of the ings and the eds.
So we want to cross out the ing of
walk and the ed of plastered but,
we specify the role very carefully
that in a Porter's stem where
only words with a vowel
get their ings removed.
And that's because a word like sing, only
words where's there's an additional vowel
before the ing, so a word like sing,
which has no extra vowel.
Sing only has one vowel, the vowel in ing.
Stays as sing but
walking which has a vowel and
in addition a vowel before the ing
is allowed to delete the suffix.
So if a word has a vowel,
followed by ing, the ing is deleted.
And there's lots of other such rules so
ational turns into ate so
we can cross off the O of relational and
the tion and
end up with relate and izer to Is and
so we cross off the R and so on.
And the rules get even more complicated so
as you get to very long stems you
going to remove the al of revival and
the able and so on.
Let's look again at this rule that
strips -ing and practice using
the Unix tools that we say in the last
section to look at morphology in a corpus.
So remember, why are we stripping
the -ings only if there's a vowel
preceding the -ing?
Here was the rule.
Remember we said that in a word like
walking, we have a vowel before the ing,
and so it's okay to remove the ing.
In a word like sing,
there is no vowel before.
There's no letters at all before that s.
There's no previous vowels.
And so sing, the rule doesn't apply.
And let's do a little search four
words ending in 'ing' in Shakespeare.
So we are going to first
take all of Shakespeare, and
turn all the non-alphabetic characters.
Oops, turn
all on the characters into new lines so
we're going to get one word per line
then we're going to translate all
of the upper case to lower case so
we're dealing with, we're combining all
the upper case and lower case words.
And now let's grep out,
grep is a program for
finding any line that contains
a regular expression in the file.
Very useful UNIX program.
So we're going to look for
the regular expression ing$.
And so we'll find all words ending
in ing and let's sort them.
And then we'll just take one
copy of each and count them, and
then sort them by the counts.
Let's see what words we find
ending in ing in Shakespeare.
And what we see is lots of
these words are not words
that in fact we would like
to remove the ing from so
we have words like king and
nothing and thing and
ring and something and sing and
anything and spring so
this is a lot of words lot
of frequent words in fact,
that it would be a bad
idea to remove the ing.
If we remove the ing from king,
we'd get K, and so on.
Remove the ing from spring, we'd get spr.
So, let's modify our rule that we did.
Instead of saying, grepping for all words
ending in ing, let's just go back and
change that to grep for
all words with a vowel.
We'll just make it be a, e, i, o, u.
Similarly our vowel which
is the old vowel letters.
And we need some way to
say there's a vowel and
then anything can happen in
between followed by the ing.
Well, what or how do we say anything?
Dot means any character,
star meaning zero and more of those.
And now, let's look at what words
we get back from that pattern.
And now, since we specified that
the word has to start with a vowel,
we've done a much better
job of finding two-syllable
words where the ing in fact
is supposed to be stripped.
So there's still some problematic words,
like nothing and something.
We don't want to get noth and someth.
And anything.
But otherwise, and maybe not cunning.
But otherwise, we done a pretty good job
of making the rule a little bit better.
So there's a little explanation of
how the porter stammer works and
then how we can actually use our Unix
tools to do the corpus linguistics
to help write rules of this kind.
So that's a simple example of morphology.
It terms out that in some languages,
much more complex morphology is necessary.
And Turkish is the famous example of this.
So here's a word in Turkish which
I wont be able to pronounce for
you which means behaving as if you are
among those whom we could not civilize.
So I assume it's the kind of thing
your mother says to you when you've
been particularly naughty and
in Turkish this is one word so
it's a very long word with a lot of stems.
We have the civilized stem and
a affix meaning calm, and
an affix meaning cause an affix
meaning notable, and so on.
And so in languages like Turkish, and as
we saw earlier for the very long nouns in
German, we're going to have to do a richer
and more complex morpheme segmentation.
So, as we've seen word tokenization, and
now we've seen that words will have to be
normalized and
stemmed to map them to a normal form.